---
title: High Output Management by Andrew S Grove
date: "2023-09-19"
path: "/bookshelf/high-output-management"
---
## I. Brief Summary
Andrew Grove teaches his readers through his experience as CEO of Intel how to manage and lead an organization. This book is all you need to run and manage a business. He was a legend of his time and Intel thrived because of a great business manager like Grove.

## II. Big Ideas
- The Breakfast Factory:
    - Everything is a process. Whether you’re compiling code, hiring staff, or making breakfast, everything can be modeled as a repeatable production process.
    - Understanding the elements of production—inputs, outputs, timing, limiting steps, quality controls, variability—lets us create and improve the “machinery” needed to fulfill our organizational goals. 
    - We all aim to achieve the same thing—high quality results in less time with least waste.
    - The output of a manager is the output of the organizational units under his or her supervision or influence.
    - Great work is not accomplished by individuals, but rather by a team of people working together.
    - As a general rule, you have to accept that no matter where you work, you are not an employee–you are in a business with one employee: yourself. You are in competition with millions of similar businesses. There are millions of others all over the world, picking up the pace, capable of doing the same work that you can do and perhaps more eager to do it.
    - Be plugged in. Try new ideas. Make sure what you are doing is actually valuable and worth paying for.
    - Fix problems at the lowest-value step in the process.
    - How do we produce something in the most efficient way possible? By designing our processes to facilitate flow through the entire system.
    - Design around the limiting step.

## III. Quotes
- You have to accept that no matter where you work, you are not an employee—you are in a business with one employee: yourself. You are in competition with millions of similar businesses. There are millions of others all over the world, picking up the pace, capable of doing the same work that you can do and perhaps more eager to do it. Now, you may be tempted to look around your workplace and point to your fellow workers as rivals, but they are not. They are outnumbered—a thousand to one, one hundred thousand to one, a million to one—by people who work for organizations that compete with your firm. So if you want to work and continue to work, you must continually dedicate yourself to retaining your individual competitive advantage.
- Remember too that your time is your one finite resource, and when you say “yes” to one thing you are inevitably saying “no” to another.
- To get acceptable quality at the lowest cost, it is vitally important to reject defective material at a stage where its accumulated value is at the lowest possible level. Thus, as noted, we are better off catching a bad raw egg than a cooked one, and screening out our college applicant before he visits Intel. In short, reject before investing further value.
- The absolute truth is that if you don’t know what you want, you won’t get it.
- But in the end self-confidence mostly comes from a gut-level realization that nobody has ever died from making a wrong business decision, or taking inappropriate action, or being overruled. And everyone in your operation should be made to understand this.
- I’d like to introduce the concept of leverage, which is the output generated by a specific type of work activity. An activity with high leverage will generate a high level of output; an activity with low leverage, a low level of output.
- Let chaos reign, then rein in chaos.
- My day always ends when I’m tired and ready to go home, not when I’m done. I am never done.
- We must recognize that no amount of formal planning can anticipate changes such as globalization and the information revolution we’ve referred to above. Does that mean that you shouldn’t plan? Not at all. You need to plan the way a fire department plans. It cannot anticipate where the next fire will be, so it has to shape an energetic and efficient team that is capable of responding to the unanticipated as well as to any ordinary event.
- Reports are more a medium of self-discipline than a way to communicate information. Writing the report is important; reading it often is not.
- When a person is not doing his job, there can only be two reasons for it. The person either can’t do it or won’t do it; he is either not capable or not motivated. To determine which, we can employ a simple mental test: if the person’s life depended on doing the work, could he do it? If the answer is yes, that person is not motivated; if the answer is no, he is not capable.
- The old saying has it that when we promote our best salesman and make him a manager, we ruin a good salesman and get a bad manager. But if we think about it, we see we have no choice but to promote the good salesman. Should our worst salesman get the job? When we promote our best, we are saying to our subordinates that performance is what counts.
- At Intel, we put ourselves through an annual strategic long-range planning effort in which we examine our future five years off. But what is really being influenced here? It is the next year—and only the next year.
- Are you trying new ideas, new techniques, and new technologies, and I mean personally trying them, not just reading about them? Or are you waiting for others to figure out how they can re-engineer your workplace—and you out of that workplace?
- The output of a manager is the output of the organizational units under his or her supervision or influence.
- The single most important task of a manager is to elicit peak performance from his subordinates. So if two things limit high output, a manager has two ways to tackle the issue: through training and motivation.
- The key to survival is to learn to add more value.
- The value system at Intel is completely the reverse. The Ph.D. in computer science who knows an answer in the abstract, yet does not apply it to create some tangible output, gets little recognition, but a junior engineer who produces results is highly valued and esteemed. And that is how it should be.
- A poor performer has a strong tendency to ignore his problem.
- Once someone’s source of motivation is self-actualization, his drive to perform has no limit. Thus, its most important characteristic is that unlike other sources of motivation, which extinguish themselves after the needs are fulfilled, self-actualization continues to motivate people to ever higher levels of performance.
- Middle managers are the muscle and bone of every sizable organization, no matter how loose or “flattened” the hierarchy, but they are largely ignored despite their immense importance to our society and economy.
- Adapt or die.
- When the need to stretch is not spontaneous, management needs to create an environment to foster it.
- So in the end careful interviewing doesn’t guarantee you anything, it merely increases your odds of getting lucky.